ADHYAYA 1
The head of the sacrificial horse, clearly, is the dawn—its sight is the sun; its
breath is the wind; and its gaping mouth is the fire common to all men. The
body (atman) of the sacrificial horse is the year—its back is the sky; its abdomen is
the intermediate region; its underbelly is the earth; its flanks are the quarters; its ribs
are the intermediate quarters; its limbs are the seasons; its joints are the months and
fortnights; its feet are the days and nights; its bones are the stars; its flesh is the
clouds; its stomach contents are the sand; its intestines are the rivers; its liver and
lungs are the hills; its body hairs are the plants and trees; its forequarter is the rising
sun; and its hindquarter is the setting sun. When it yawns, lightning flashes; when it
shakes itself, it thunders; and when it urinates, it rains. Its neighing is speech itself.
2
 The day, clearly, was born afterwards to be the sacrificial cup placed in front
of the horse, and its womb is in the eastern sea. The night was born afterwards to be
the sacrificial cup placed behind the horse, and its womb is in the western sea.
These two came into being to be the sacrificial cups placed in front of and behind
the horse. It became a racer and carried the gods. It became a charger and carried
the Gandharvas. It became a courser and carried the demons. It became a horse and
carried the humans. The sea, indeed, is its counterpart; the sea is its womb.
1
In the beginning there was nothing here at all. Death alone covered this completely, as did hunger; for what is hunger but death? Then death made up his
mind: "Let me equip myself with a body (atman)." So he undertook a liturgica
recitation (arc), and as he was engaged in liturgical recitation water sprang fron
him. And he thought: "While I was engaged in liturgical recitation (arc), water (ka
sprang up for me." This is what gave the name to and discloses the true nature o:
recitation (arka). Water undoubtedly springs for him who knows the name and na
ture of recitation in this way.
 2So, recitation is water.
Then the foam that had gathered on the water solidified and became the earth
Death toiled upon her. When he had become worn out by toil and hot with exertion
his heat—his essence—turned into fire.
3
 He divided this body (atman) of his into three—one third became the sun and
another the wind. He is also breath divided into three. His head is the eastern quar
ter, and his two forequarters are the southeast and the northeast. His tail is the west
and his two hindquarters are the southwest and the northwest. His flanks are the
south and the north. His back is the sky; his abdomen is the intermediate region; and
his chest is this earth. He stands firm in the waters. A man who knows this wil
stand firm wherever he may go.